---
title: Paper Talk $|$ The Hagedorn/Deconfinement Phase Transition in Weakly Coupled Large $N$ Gauge Theories.
tags: Review Derivations
---
This post continues the review of Aharony, Marsano, Minwalla, Papadodimas, $\textit{&}$ Van Raamsdonk's **[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0310285)** and builds on the previous **[article](https://adhumunt.github.io/post/2019/06/18/0310235-Overview.html)**. Here, we establish various derivations claimed in the paper and verify the temperature behavior espoused in the abstract. 

<!--more-->

## Appendix

Like all good papers, the physics lives in the main content and the calculations live in the appendix. Though it might be strange to start in the appendix, we will see that these calculations cleanly carry over to the rest of the paper.

### Appendix A. Properties of Group Characters

A **character** provides a powerful tool to determine the set of irreducible representations obtained in the tensor product of some collection of other representations. By definition, a character for tensor sums and products of representations respects linearity;

$$
\begin{align*}
	\chi_{R_i\bigoplus R_j} = \chi_{R_i} + \chi_{R_j}\hspace{.5in}\chi_{R_i\bigotimes R_j} = \chi_{R_i}\cdot\chi_{R_j}
\end{align*}
$$

The above relations may be established 


### Appendix B. Counting of states in $U(N)$ gauge theories

The main idea in counting of gauge invariant states is best summarized in the paper;

In order to count the number of independent operators corresponding to traces of products of fields in the large $N$ limit, we wish to count the number of different arrangements of objects subject to an idenfitication of arrangements related by a cyclic permutation. This can be done using Polya's theorem.
{:.info}

#### Polya's Theorem
Polya's enumeration theorem is a particular theorem in enumerative combinatorics; it serves as a basis of methods often called Polya's enumeration (counting) theory. It is especially used in counting of graphs, or in this case, partition function sums.

We state Polya's theorem for easy reference;

Let $X$ be a finite set and let $\mathscr{G}$ be a group of permutation of $X$. Suppose further that $Y$ is a finite set so that $Y^X$ is a set of arrangements. Then the group $\mathscr{G}$ acts on $Y^X$. The number of orbits under $\mathscr{G}$ of arrangements of beads is provided by 
$$
\begin{equation}
	|Y^X/G| = \frac{1}{|G|}\sum_{g\in\mathscr{G}}m^{c(g)}
\end{equation}
$$
where $m=|Y|$ is the cardinality of $Y$ and $c(g)$ is the number of cycles of the group element $g$ when considered as a permutation of $X$.
{:.warning}




### Appendix C. Hagedorn Transitions at Finite String Coupling





> Representation:

> Irreducible Representation: 

> Character: Given a group, $\mathscr{G}$, we may associate with any representation $R_i$ a **character**, $\chi_{R_i}:\mathscr{G}\to \mathbb{C}$, defined such that $\chi_{R_i}(U)$ is equal to the trace of the group element $U$ in the representation $R_i$. Shorthand: $\chi_{R_i}(U)=\text{tr}_{R_i}(U)$.

> Invariant Harr Measure